The following is a conversation with Leonard Suskind.
He's a professor of theoretical physics at Stanford University
and founding director of Stanford Institute of Theoretical Physics.
He is widely regarded as one of the fathers of string theory and in general
is one of the greatest physicists of our time both as a researcher
and an educator. This is the Artificial Intelligence Podcast.
Perhaps you noticed that the people I've been speaking with are not just
computer scientists but philosophers, mathematicians, writers, psychologists,
physicists, and soon other disciplines. To me,
AI is much bigger than deep learning, bigger than computing.
It is our civilization's journey into understanding the human mind
and creating echoes of it in the machine. If you enjoy the podcast, subscribe on
YouTube, give it five stars on iTunes, support on Patreon,
or simply connect with me on Twitter at Lex Freedman, spelled F R I D M A M.
And now, here's my conversation with Leonard Suskind.
You worked and were friends with Richard Feynman. How has he influenced you
and changed you as a physicist and thinker?
What I saw, I think what I saw was somebody who could do physics in this
deeply intuitive way. His style was almost to close his
eyes and visualize the phenomena that he was thinking about.
And through visualization,
outflank the mathematical, the highly mathematical and
very, very sophisticated technical arguments that people would use.
I think that was also natural to me, but I saw somebody who was actually
successful at it, who could do physics in a way
that I regarded as simpler, more direct,
more intuitive. And while I don't think he changed
my way of thinking, I do think he validated it.
He made me look at it and say, yeah, that's something you can do
and get away with. Practically, you can get away with it.
So, do you find yourself, whether you're thinking about quantum mechanics
or black holes or string theory using intuition
as a first step or step throughout using visualization?
Yeah, very much so. Very much so. I tend not to think about the equations. I tend
not to think about the symbols. I tend to try to visualize the
phenomena themselves. And then when I get an insight
that I think is valid, I might try to convert it to mathematics. But I'm not a
I'm not a natural mathematician or I'm good enough at it.
I'm good enough at it, but I'm not a great mathematician.
So, for me, the way of thinking about physics is first intuitive, first
visualization, scribble a few equations maybe, but then try to convert it to
mathematics. Experiences that other people are
better at converting it to mathematics than I am.
And yet, you've worked very counterintuitive ideas.
So, how do you visualize something counterintuitive?
How do you dare rewiring your brain in new ways?
Yeah, quantum mechanics is not intuitive. Very little of modern physics is
intuitive. What does intuitive mean?
It means the ability to think about it with basic classical physics, the
physics that we evolved with throwing stones,
splashing water, whatever it happens to be. Quantum physics, general relativity,
quantum field theory are deeply unintuitive in that way.
But, you know, after time and getting familiar with these things, you
develop new intuitions. I always said you rewire.
And it's to the point where me and many of my friends,
I and many of my friends, can think more easily quantum
mechanically than we can classically. We've gotten so used to it.
I mean, yes, our neural wiring in our brain is such that we understand
rocks and stones and water and so on. We're sort of evolved for that.
Evolved for it. Do you think it's possible to create a wiring
of neuron like state devices that more naturally understand
quantum mechanics, understand wave function, understand these weird things?
Well, I'm not sure. I think many of us have evolved
the ability to think quantum mechanically to some extent.
But that doesn't mean you can think like an electron.
That doesn't mean another example. Forget for a minute, quantum mechanics.
Just visualizing four dimensional space or five dimensional space or six
dimensional space, I think we're fundamentally wired
to visualize three dimensions. I can't even
visualize two dimensions or one dimension without thinking about it as
embedded in three dimensions. If I want to visualize a line,
I think of the line as being a line in three dimensions.
Or I think of the line as being a line on a piece of paper with a piece of paper
being in three dimensions. I never seem to be able to
in some abstract and pure way visualize in my head
the one dimension, the two dimension, the four dimension, the five dimensions,
and I don't think that's ever going to happen. The reason is I think
neural wiring is just set up for that.
On the other hand, we do learn ways to think about
five, six, seven dimensions. We learn ways, we learn
mathematical ways, and we learn ways to visualize them, but they're different.
And so yeah, I think we do rewire ourselves, whether we can ever
completely rewire ourselves to be completely comfortable with these
concepts, I doubt. So that it's completely natural.
Difficult to where it's completely natural. So I'm sure there's
somewhat, you could argue, creatures that live in a two dimensional
space. Yeah, maybe there are. And while it's
romanticizing the notion, of course, we're all living as far as we know in
three dimensional space, but how do those creatures imagine
3D space? Well, probably the way we imagine 4D by
using some mathematics and some equations and some
some tricks. Okay, so jumping back to Feynman just
for a second, he had a little bit of an ego.
Yes. Do you think ego is powerful or dangerous in science?
I think both. Both. I think you have to have both arrogance
and humility. You have to have the arrogance to say
I can do this. Nature is difficult. Nature is very, very hard.
I'm smart enough. I can do it. I can win the battle with nature.
On the other hand, I think you also have to have the humility
to know that you're very likely to be wrong on any given occasion.
Everything you're thinking could suddenly change.
Young people can come along and say things you won't understand and you'll be
lost and flabbergasted. So I think it's a combination of both.
You better recognize that you're very limited
and you better be able to say to yourself I'm not so limited
that I can't win this battle with nature. It takes a special kind of
person who can manage both of those, I would say.
And I would say there's echoes of that in your own work.
A little bit of ego, a little bit of outside of the box, humble thinking.
I hope so. So was there a time
where you felt you looked at yourself and asked
am I completely wrong about this? Oh yeah, about the whole thing or about
specific things. The whole thing? What do you mean?
Wait, which whole thing? Me and me and my ability to do this thing.
Oh, those kinds of doubts. First of all, did you have those kinds of doubts?
No, I had different kind of doubts. I came from a very working class background
and I was uncomfortable in academia for, well, for a long time.
But there weren't doubts about my ability or my,
they were just the discomfort and being in an environment that
my family hadn't participated in. I knew nothing about as a young person. I
didn't learn that there was such a thing called physics until I was almost 20
years old. So I did have certain kind of
doubts, but not about my ability. I don't think I was too
worried about whether I would succeed or not.
I never felt this insecurity, am I ever going to get a job?
That had never occurred to me that I wouldn't.
Maybe you could speak a little bit to this sense of what is academia,
because I too feel a bit uncomfortable in it.
There's something I can't put quite into words, what you have
that's not, doesn't, if we call it music,
you play a different kind of music than a lot of academia.
How have you joined this orchestra? How do you think about it?
I don't know that I thought about it as much as I just
felt it. You know, thinking is one thing, feeling is another thing.
I felt like an outsider until a certain age when I suddenly found myself the
ultimate insider in academic physics.
That was a sharp transition and I wasn't a young man. I was
probably 50 years old. You were never quite, it was a face
transition, you were never quite in the middle.
Yeah, that's right, I wasn't. I always felt a little bit of an outsider
in the beginning, a lot an outsider.
My way of thinking was different, my approach to mathematics was different,
but also my social background that I came from was different.
Now these days, half the young people I meet, they're parents or professors.
Right. That was not my case.
So yeah, but then all of a sudden at some point I found myself at very much the
center of, maybe not the only one at the center, but certainly one of the people
in the center of a certain kind of physics and all that went away.
I mean it went away in a flash. So maybe a little bit with Feynman,
but in general, how do you develop ideas? Do you work
through ideas alone? Do you brainstorm with others?
Oh, both, both, very definitely both. The younger time I spent more time with
myself. Now because I'm at
Stanford, because I'm, because I have a lot of
ex students and people who are interested in the same thing I am,
I spend a good deal of time almost on a daily basis
interacting, brainstorming, as you said. It's a very important part.
I spend less time probably completely self focused than
with a piece of paper and just sitting there staring at it.
What are your hopes for quantum computers?
So machines that are based on, that have some elements of
leveraged quantum mechanical ideas. Yeah, it's not just leveraging quantum
mechanical ideas. You can simulate quantum systems on a classical computer.
Simulate them means solve this Schrodinger equation for them
or solve the equations of quantum mechanics on
a computer, on a classical computer. But the classical computer is not doing,
is not a quantum mechanical system itself. Of course it is. Everything's made of
quantum mechanics, but it's not functioning. It's not functioning as
a quantum system. It's just solving equations.
The quantum computer is truly a quantum system which is
actually doing the things that you're programming it to do.
You want to program a quantum field theory?
If you do it in classical physics, that program is not actually functioning in
the computer as a quantum field theory. It's just solving some equations.
Physically it's not doing the things that the quantum system would do.
The quantum computer is really a quantum mechanical system which is
actually carrying out the quantum operations. You can measure it at the end.
It intrinsically satisfies the uncertainty principle.
It is limited in the same way that quantum systems are limited
by uncertainty and so forth. And it really is a quantum system. That means
that what you're doing when you program something for a quantum
system is you're actually building a real version of the system.
The limits of a classical computer. Classical computers are enormously limited
when it comes to the quantum systems. They're enormously
limited because you've probably heard this before.
But in order to store the amount of information that's in the quantum state
of 400 spins, that's not very many. 400 can put in my pocket.
400 pennies in my pocket.
To be able to simulate the quantum state of 400 elementary quantum
systems, qubits we call them, to do that would take more information than can
possibly be stored in the entire universe if it were packed
so tightly that you couldn't pack any more in.
400 qubits. On the other hand, if your quantum
computer is composed of 400 qubits, it can do everything 400 qubits can do.
What kind of space, if you just intuitively think about the space of
algorithms that that unlocks for us. So there's a whole complexity theory
around classical computers measuring the running time of things
and p, so on. What kind of algorithms just intuitively do you think it unlocks for us?
Okay, so we know that there are a handful of algorithms that can seriously
be classical computers and which can have exponentially
more power. This is a mathematical statement. Nobody's exhibited this in
the laboratory. That's a mathematical statement. We know
that's true, but it also seems more and more that the
number of such things is very limited. Only very, very special
problems exhibit that much advantage for a quantum computer,
of standard problems. To my mind, as far as I can tell, the great power of
quantum computers will actually be the simulate quantum systems.
If you're interested in a certain quantum system
and it's too hard to simulate classically, you simply build a version
of the same system. You build a version of it, you build a model of it that's
actually functioning as the system, you run it, and then you do the same thing
you would do the quantum system, you make measurements on it,
quantum measurements on it. The advantage is you can run it much slower
because say, why bother? Why not just use the real system?
Why not just do experiments on the real system? Well, real systems are kind of
limited. You can't change them. You can't manipulate them.
You can't slow them down so that you can poke into them.
You can't modify them in arbitrary kinds of ways to see what would happen
if I change the system a little bit. I think that quantum computers
will be extremely valuable in understanding quantum
systems. At the lowest level, the fundamental
laws. They're actually satisfying the same laws
as the systems that they're simulating. That's right.
Okay, so on the one hand you have things like factoring.
Factoring is the great thing of quantum computers, factoring large
numbers. That doesn't seem that much to do with
quantum mechanics. It seems to be almost a fluke
that a quantum computer can solve the factoring problem
in a short time. Those problems seem to be extremely special,
rare, and it's not clear to me that there's going to be a lot of them.
On the other hand, there are a lot of quantum systems. There's chemistry,
there's solid state physics, there's material science,
there's quantum gravity, there's all kinds of quantum field theory.
Some of these are actually turning out to be applied sciences as well as very
fundamental sciences. We probably will run out of the
ability to solve equations for these things.
Solve equations by the standard methods of pencil and paper.
Solve the equations by the method of classical computers.
And so what we'll do is we'll build versions of these systems,
run them, and run them under controlled circumstances where we can change them,
manipulate them, make measurements on them, and find out all the things we want
to know. So in finding out the things we want to know
about very small systems, is there something we can also find out
about the macro level, about something about the function,
forgive me, of our brain, biological systems, the stuff that's about one meter
in size versus much, much smaller? Well, what all the
excitement is about among the people that I interact with is
understanding black holes. Black holes. Black holes are big things.
They are many, many degrees of freedom. There is another kind of quantum system
that is big. It's a large quantum computer. And one of the things we've
learned is that the physics of large quantum computers is in some way
similar to the physics of large quantum black holes.
And we're using that relationship. Now you asked, you didn't ask about quantum
computers as systems, you didn't ask about black holes, you asked about brains.
Yeah, about stuff that's in the middle of the two. It's different.
So black holes are, there's something fundamental
about black holes that feels to be very different than a brain. Yes.
And they also function in a very quantum mechanical way. Right.
Okay. It is, first of all, unclear to me, but of course it's unclear to me. I'm not
I'm not a neuroscientist. I have, I don't even have very many friends who are
neuroscientists. I would like to have more friends who are
neuroscientists. I just don't run into them very often.
Among the few neuroscientists I've ever talked about about this,
they are pretty convinced that the brain
functions classically, that it is not intrinsically a quantum mechanical
system, or it doesn't make use of the of the
special features entanglement, coherent superposition.
Are they right? I don't know. I sort of hope they're wrong,
just because I like the romantic idea that the brain is a quantum
system. Yeah. But I think, I think probably not.
The other thing, big systems can be composed of lots of little systems.
Okay. Materials, the materials that we work with and so forth
are, can be large systems, a large piece of material,
but they're big and they're made out of quantum systems. Now one of the things
that's been happening over the last, a good number of years
is we're discovering materials and quantum systems
which function much more quantum mechanically
than we imagine. Topological insulators, this kind of thing, that kind of thing.
Those are macroscopic systems, but they're just superconductors,
superconductors. I have a lot of quantum mechanics in them.
You can have a large chunk of superconductor, so it's a big piece of
material. On the other hand, it's functioning and
its properties depend very, very strongly on quantum mechanics
and to analyze them, you need the tools of quantum mechanics.
If we can go on to black holes and looking at the universe as a
information processing system, as a computer, as a giant computer,
what's the power of thinking of the universe as an information processing
system, but what is perhaps its use besides the
mathematical use of discussing black holes and
your famous debates and ideas around that to
human beings or life in general as information processing systems.
But all systems are information processing systems.
You poke them, they change a little bit, they evolve.
All systems are information processing systems. So there's no extra magic
to us humans. It certainly feels, consciousness and
intelligence feels like magic. It sure does. Where does it emerge from
if we look at information processing?
What are the emergent phenomena that come from viewing the world
as an information processing system? Here is what I think.
My thoughts are not worth much in this. If you ask me about physics, my thoughts
may be worth something. Yes. If you ask me about this, I'm not
sure my thoughts are worth anything, but as I said earlier,
I think when we do introspection, when we imagine doing introspection and try to
figure out what it is when we do and we're thinking,
I think we get it wrong. I'm pretty sure we get it wrong.
Everything I've heard about the way the brain functions is so counterintuitive.
For example, you have neurons which detect vertical lines.
You have different neurons which detect lines at 45 degrees. You have different
neurons. I never imagined that there were whole
circuits which were devoted to vertical lines in my brain.
It doesn't seem to me the way my brain works. My brain seems to work if I put my
finger up vertically, or if I put it horizontally, or if I put it this way or
that way. It seems to me it's the same circuits.
It's not the way it works. The way the brain is compartmentalized
seems to be very, very different than what I would have imagined if I were just
doing psychological introspection about how things work.
My conclusion is that we won't get it right that way.
How will we get it right? I think maybe computer scientists will get it
right eventually. I don't think there are any ways near it. I don't even think
they're thinking about it. But by computer, eventually we will
build machines perhaps which are complicated enough
and partly engineered, partly evolved, maybe evolved by machine learning and so
forth. This machine learning is very interesting.
By machine learning we will evolve systems and we may start
to discover mechanisms that have implications
for how we think and for what this consciousness thing is all about.
We'll be able to do experiments on them and perhaps answer questions
that we can't possibly answer by introspection.
That's a really interesting point. In many cases,
if you look even at string theory, when you first think about a system it seems
really complicated, like the human brain. Through some basic reasoning
and trying to discover fundamental low level
behavior of the system, you find out that it's actually much simpler.
Is that generally the process and do you have that also hope
for biological systems as well, for all the kinds of stuff we're studying
at the human level? Of course, physics always begins by trying to find the
simplest version of something and analyze it. There are lots of
examples where physics has taken very complicated
systems, analyzed them and found simplicity in them for sure.
I said superconductors before. It's an obvious one. A superconductor seems like
a monstrously complicated thing with all sorts of crazy
electrical properties, magnetic properties and so forth.
When it finally is boiled down to its simplest elements,
it's a very simple quantum mechanical phenomenon
called spontaneous symmetry breaking which we, in other contexts,
we learned about and we're very familiar with. So yeah, I mean,
yes, we do take complicated things, make them simple,
but what we don't want to do is take things which are intrinsically
complicated and fool ourselves into thinking that we can make them simple.
I don't know who said this, but we don't want to make them simpler than they
really are. Is the brain a thing which ultimately
functions by some simple rules or is it just complicated?
In terms of artificial intelligence, nobody really knows
what are the limits of our current approaches. You mentioned machine
learning. How do we create human level intelligence? It seems that there's a
lot of very smart physicists who perhaps oversimplify the nature of
intelligence and think of it as information processing
and therefore there doesn't seem to be any theoretical reason
why we can't artificially create human level or superhuman level
intelligence. In fact, the reasoning goes if you create human level intelligence,
the same approach you just used to create human level intelligence
should allow you to create superhuman level intelligence very easily,
exponentially. So what do you think that way of thinking
that comes from physicist is all about? I wish I knew, but there's a particular
reason why I wish I knew. I have a second job.
I consult for Google, not for Google, for Google X.
I am the senior academic advisor to a group of machine learning physicists.
Now that sounds crazy because I know nothing about the subject.
I know very little about the subject. On the other hand, I'm good at giving
advice, so I give them advice on things. Anyway,
I see these young physicists who are approaching the machine learning problem.
There is a real machine learning problem, namely why does it
work as well as it does? Nobody really seems to understand
why it is capable of doing the kind of generalizations that it does
and so forth. There are three groups of people who
have thought about this. There are the engineers.
The engineers are incredibly smart, but they tend not to think as hard about
why the thing is working as much as they do how to use it.
Obviously, they provided a lot of data, and it is they who demonstrated that
machine learning can work much better than you had any right to expect.
The machine learning systems are systems that the system is not too
different than the kind of systems that physicists study.
There's not all that much difference in the structure of the mathematics.
Physically, yes, but in the structure of the mathematics
between a tensor network designed to describe a quantum system, on the one
hand, and the kind of networks that are used in
machine learning. So, there are more and more, I think,
young physicists are being drawn to this field of machine learning.
Some very, very good ones. I work with a number of very good ones.
Not on machine learning, but on having lunch.
On having lunch, right. And I can tell you, they are super smart.
They don't seem to be so arrogant about their physics backgrounds that they
think they can do things that nobody else can do.
But the physics way of thinking, I think, will add
great value to, will bring value to the machine learning.
I believe it will. And I think it already has.
At what time scale do you think predicting the future becomes useless?
And your long experience and being surprised in your discoveries?
Sometimes a day, sometimes 20 years. There are things which I thought
we were very far from understanding, which practically in a snap of the fingers
or a blink of the eye suddenly became understood,
completely surprising to me.
There are other things which I looked at and I said,
we're not going to understand these things for 500 years,
in particular quantum gravity. The scale for that was 20 years, 25 years.
And we understand a lot, and we don't understand it completely now by any
means. But I thought it was 500 years to make any
progress. It turned out to be very, very far from
that. It turned out to be more like 20 or 25 years
from the time when I thought it was 500 years.
So if we may, can we jump around quantum gravity, some basic ideas in physics?
What is the dream of string theory, mathematically?
What is the hope? Where does it come from? What problem is it trying to solve?
I don't think the dream of string theory is any different than the dream of
fundamental theoretical physics altogether. Understanding a unified
theory of everything. I don't like thinking of string theory
as a subject unto itself with people called string theorists who are the
practitioners of this thing called string theory.
I much prefer to think of them as theoretical physicists
trying to answer deep fundamental questions about nature,
in particular gravity, in particular gravity and its connection with quantum
mechanics, and who at the present time find
string theory a useful tool rather than saying there's a subject
called string theorist. I don't like being referred to as a string
theorist. Yes, but as a tool, is it useful to think
about our nature in multiple dimensions, the strings
vibrating? I believe it is useful. I'll tell you
what the main use of it has been up till now. Well, it has had a number of main
uses. Originally string theory was invented,
then I know there I was there. I was right at the spot where it was being
invented, literally, and it was being invented to
understand hadrons. Hadrons are subnuclear particles,
protons, neutrons, mesons, and at that time, the late 60s,
early 70s, it was clear from experiment that these particles
called hadrons could vibrate, could rotate,
could do all the things that a little closed string can do,
and it was and is a valid and correct theory of these
hadrons. It's been experimentally tested, and that is a done deal.
It had a second life as a theory of gravity, the same basic mathematics
except on a very, very much smaller distance scale.
The objects of gravitation are 19 orders of magnitude smaller than
a proton, but the same mathematics turned up.
The same mathematics turned up. What has been its value?
Its value is that it's mathematically rigorous in many ways
and enabled us to find mathematical structures which have
both quantum mechanics and gravity with rigor.
We can test out ideas. We can test out ideas. We can't test them in the
laboratory. They had 19 orders of magnitude too
small, the things that we're interested in, but we can test them out
mathematically and analyze their internal consistency.
By now, 40 years ago, 35 years ago, so forth, people very, very much
questioned the consistency between gravity and quantum mechanics.
Stephen Hawking was very famous for it, rightly so.
Now nobody questions that consistency anymore. They don't because we have
mathematically precise string theories which contain both
gravity and quantum mechanics in a consistent way.
So it's provided that certainty that quantum mechanics and gravity can
coexist. That's not a small thing. It's a very big thing.
It's a huge thing. Einstein will be proud.
Einstein, he might be appalled. I don't know. He didn't like quantum mechanics very much,
but he would certainly be struck by it. Yeah.
I think that may be at this time its biggest contribution to physics in
illustrating almost definitively that quantum mechanics and gravity are very
closely related and not inconsistent with each other.
Is there a possibility of something deeper, more profound,
that still is consistent with string theory but is deeper
that is to be found? Well, you could ask the same thing about quantum mechanics.
Is there something? Exactly.
Yeah. I think string theory is just an example of a quantum mechanical system
that contains both gravitation and quantum mechanics.
So is there something underlying quantum mechanics?
Perhaps something deterministic.
Perhaps something deterministic. My friend,
Ferrad Etouft, whose name you may know, he's a very famous physicist.
Dutch, not as famous as he should be, but...
Hard to spell his name. It's hard to say his name.
No, it's easy to spell his name. Apostrophe. He's the only person I know whose
name begins with a metastrophe. And he's one of my heroes in physics.
He's a little younger than me, but he's nevertheless one of my heroes.
Etouft believes that there is some sub structure to the world
which is classical in character, deterministic in character,
which somehow by some mechanism that he has a hard time
spelling out emerges as quantum mechanics.
I don't. The wave function is somehow emergent.
The wave function and not just the wave function, but the whole
mech and the whole thing that goes with quantum mechanics, uncertainty,
entanglement, all these things are emergent.
So you think quantum mechanics is the bottom of the well?
Is the... Here I think is where you have to be humble.
Here's where humility comes. I don't think anybody should say anything is
the bottom of the well at this time. I think we...
I think we can reasonably say...
I can reasonably say when I look into the well,
I can't see past quantum mechanics. I don't see any reason for it to be
anything beyond quantum mechanics. I think Etouft has asked very
interesting and deep questions. I don't like his answers.
Well, again, let me ask, if we look at the deepest nature of reality
with whether it's deterministic or when observed as probabilistic,
what does that mean for our human level of ideas of free will?
Is there any connection whatsoever from this perception, perhaps illusion, of
free will that we have and the fundamental nature of reality?
The only thing I can say is I am puzzled by that as much as you are.
The illusion of it. The illusion of consciousness, the illusion of free will,
the illusion of self. Does that connect to...
How can a physical system do that? And I am as puzzled as anybody.
There's echoes of it in the observer effect.
Yeah. So do you understand what it means to be an observer?
I understand it at a technical level. An observer is a system with enough
degrees of freedom that it can record information and which can become
entangled with the thing that it's measuring. Entanglement is the key.
When a system which we call an apparatus or an observer,
same thing, interacts with the system that it's observing,
it doesn't just look at it, it becomes physically entangled with it.
And it's that entanglement which we call an observation or a measurement.
Now, does that satisfy me personally as an observer?
Yes or no. I find it very satisfying that we have a mathematical representation
of what it means to observe a system. You are observing stuff right now,
the conscious level. Right. Do you think there's echoes
of that kind of entanglement in our macro scale?
Yes, absolutely, for sure. We're entangled with it,
quantum mechanically entangled with everything in this room.
If we weren't, then it would just, well, we wouldn't be observing it.
But on the other hand, you can ask, am I really comfortable with it?
And I'm uncomfortable with it in the same way that I can never get comfortable
with five dimensions. My brain isn't wired for it.
Are you comfortable with four dimensions? A little bit more,
because I can always imagine the fourth dimension is time.
So the arrow of time, are you comfortable with that arrow?
Do you think time is an emergent phenomena or is it fundamental to nature?
That is a big question in physics right now. All the physics that we do,
or at least at the people that I am comfortable talking to,
my friends, my friends. No, we all ask the same question that you just asked.
Space, we have a pretty good idea, is emergent and it emerges out of
entanglement and other things. Time always seems to be built into
our equations as just what Newton pretty much would have thought.
Newton modified a little bit by Einstein, would have called time.
And mostly in our equations, it is not emergent.
Time in physics is completely symmetric forward and back.
Symmetric. So you don't really need to think about
the arrow of time for most physical phenomena.
For most microscopic phenomena, no. It's only when the phenomena involves
systems which are big enough for thermodynamics to become important,
for entropy to become important. For a small system,
entropy is not a good concept.
Entropy is something which emerges out of large numbers.
It's a probabilistic idea, it's a statistical idea,
and it's a thermodynamic idea. Thermodynamics requires lots and lots and
lots of little substructures. So it's not until you emerge
at the thermodynamic level that there's an arrow of time,
do we understand it? Yeah, I think we understand better than most people
think they are. Most people say they think we understand it.
Yeah, I think we understand it. It's a statistical idea.
You mean like second law, thermodynamics, entropy and so on?
Yeah, you take a pack of cards and you fling it in the air and you look what
happens to it. It gets random. It doesn't go from
random to simple. It goes from simple to random.
But do you think it ever breaks down? What I think
you can do is in a laboratory setting, you can take a system which is somewhere
intermediate between being small and being large
and make it go backward. A thing which looks like it
only wants to go forward because of statistical mechanical reasons, because of
the second law, you can very very carefully manipulate it
to make it run backward. I don't think you can take an egg
Humpty Dumpty who fell on the floor and reverse that,
but you can in a very controlled situation, you can take systems
which appear to be evolving statistically toward randomness,
stop them, reverse them and make them go back.
What's the intuition behind that? How do we do that? How do we reverse it?
You're saying a closed system. Yeah, pretty much closed system.
Yes. Did you just say that time travel is possible?
No, I didn't say time travel is possible. I said you can make a system go
backward. In time. You can make it go back. You can
make it reverse its steps. You can make it reverse its trajectory.
Yeah. How do we do it? What's the intuition there? Is it just a
fluke thing that we can do at a small scale in
the lab that doesn't have... What I'm saying is you can do it on a little
bit better than a small scale. You can certainly do it
with a simple small system. Small systems don't have any sense of the
arrow of time atoms. Atoms are
no sense of an arrow of time. They're completely reversible.
It's only when you have... The second law of thermodynamics is the
law of large numbers. So you can break the law because it's not...
You can break it, but it's hard. It requires great
care. The bigger the system is, the more care and more
the harder it is. You have to overcome what's called chaos.
And that's hard. And it requires more and more precision. For 10 particles, you
might be able to do it with some effort.
For 100 particles, it's really hard. For a thousand or a million particles,
forget it. But not for any fundamental reason, just
because it's technologically too hard to make the system go
backward.
So no time travel for engineering reasons?
No. What is time travel? Time travel to the future?
That's easy. You just close your eyes, go to sleep, and you wake up in the
future. Good nap gets you there.
But in reversing the second law of thermodynamics,
going backward in time for anything that's human scale is a very difficult
engineering effort. I wouldn't call that time travel because
it gets too mixed up with what science fiction calls time travel.
This is just the ability to reverse a system. You take the system
and you reverse the direction of motion of every molecule in it.
You can do it with one molecule. If you find a particle moving in a
certain direction, let's not say a particle, a baseball,
you stop it dead and then you simply reverse its motion
in principle. That's not too hard and it'll go back along its
trajectory in the backward direction. Just running the program backwards?
Running the program backward. If you have two baseballs colliding,
well you can do it but you have to be very very careful to get it just
right. If you have 10 baseballs, really really
better yet, 10 billiard balls on an idealized frictionless billiard
table. You start the balls all in a triangle
and you whack them. Depending on the game you're playing, you either whack them
or you're really careful but you whack them and they go flying
off in all possible directions. Try to reverse that.
Imagine trying to take every billiard ball stopping it dead at some
point and reversing its motion so it was going in the opposite direction.
If you did that with tremendous care, it would
reassemble itself back into the triangle. Okay,
that is a fact and you can probably do it with two billiard balls, maybe with
three billiard balls if you're really lucky. But what happens is as the system
gets more and more complicated, you have to be more and more precise
not to make the tiniest error because the tiniest errors will get magnified
and you'll simply not be able to do the reversal.
So yeah, but I wouldn't call that time travel.
Yeah, that's something else. But if you think of it,
it just made me think, if you think the unrolling
of state that's happening as a program, if we look at the world,
silly idea of looking at the world as a simulation,
as a computer, but it's not a computer, it's just a single program.
A question arises that might be useful, how hard is it
to have a computer that runs the universe? Okay, so
there are mathematical universes that we know about, one of them is called
anti decider space where we and its quantum mechanics.
I think we could simulate it in a quantum computer.
Classical computer, all you can do is solve its equations. You can't make it
work like the real system. If we could build a quantum
computer, a big enough one, a robust enough one,
we could probably simulate a universe,
a small version of an anti decider universe. Anti decider is a kind of a
cosmology. So I think we know how to do that.
The trouble is the universe that we live in is not
the anti decider geometry, it's the decider geometry,
and we don't really understand its quantum mechanics at all.
So at the present time, I would say we wouldn't have the vaguest idea how to
simulate a universe similar to our own.
Could we build in the laboratory a small version,
a quantum mechanical version, the collection of quantum computers entangled
and coupled together, which would reproduce the phenomena that go on
in the universe, even on a small scale. Yes, if it were anti decider space,
no, if it's the decider space. Can you slightly describe the decider space and
anti decider space? Yeah.
What are the geometric properties of? They differ by the sign of a single
constant called the cosmological constant. One of them
is negatively curved, the other is positively curved.
Anti decider space, which is the negatively curved one,
you can think of as an isolated system in a box with reflecting walls.
You could think of it as a system of quantum mechanical system,
isolated in an isolated environment. The decider space is the one we really
live in, and that's the one that's exponentially expanding.
Exponential expansion, dark energy, whatever we want to call it,
and we don't understand that mathematically.
Not everybody would agree with me, but I don't understand.
They definitely would agree with me that I don't understand it.
What about, is there an understanding of the birth,
the origin, the bang bang? No, no, no, no, there's theories.
There are theories. My favorite is the one called eternal inflation.
The infinity can be on both sides, on one of the sides, and none of the sides.
So what's eternal infinity? Okay.
Infinity on both sides. Oh boy. Yeah, yeah, that's...
Why is that your favorite? Because it's the most just mind blowing?
No, because we want a beginning. No, why do we want a beginning?
I practiced it was a beginning, of course, and practiced it was a
beginning, but could it have been
a random fluctuation in an otherwise infinite time? Maybe.
In any case, the eternal inflation theory,
I think, if correctly understood, would be infinite in both directions.
How do you think about infinity? Oh god.
So, okay, of course you can think about it mathematically.
I just finished this discussion with my friend Sergei Brin.
Yes. How do you think about infinity? I say, well, Sergei Brin is infinitely
rich. How do you test that hypothesis?
Okay, that's such a good line. Right.
Yeah, so there's really no way to visualize some of these things.
Yeah, this is a very good question. Does infinity have any place in
physics? Right. Right, and all I can say is very
good question.
So, what do you think of the recent first image of a black hole visualized from
the event horizon telescope? It's an incredible triumph of science.
In itself, the fact that there are black holes which collide is not a surprise,
and they seem to work exactly the way they're supposed to work.
Will we learn a great deal from it? I don't know. I can't.
We might, but the kind of things we'll learn won't really be about black holes.
Why there are black holes in nature of that particular mass scale and why
they're so common may tell us something about the
structure, evolution of structure in the universe.
But I don't think it's going to tell us anything new about black holes.
But it's a triumph in the sense that you go back a hundred years and it was a
continuous development, general relativity, the discovery of
black holes, LIGO, the incredible technology that
went into LIGO.
It is something that I never would have believed was going to happen
30, 40 years ago. And I think it's a magnificent structure, a
magnificent thing, this evolution of general
relativity, LIGO, high precision, ability to
measure things on a scale of 10 to the minus 21.
So yeah. So you're just astonishing though we
that this path took us to this picture. Is it different?
You've thought a lot about black holes. How did you visualize them
in your mind? And is the picture different than you
utilized it? No, it's simply confirmed.
It's a magnificent triumph to have confirmed a direct observation
that Einstein's theory of gravity at the level of
black hole collisions actually works
is awesome. It is really awesome. You know, I know some of the people who are
involved in that. They're just ordinary people.
And the idea that they could carry this out,
I'm shocked. Yeah, just these little homo sapiens.
Yeah, just these little monkeys got together and took a picture of
slightly advanced limers, I think. What kind of questions
can science not currently answer but you hope might be able to soon?
Well, you've already addressed them. What is consciousness, for example?
You think that's within the reach of science? I think it's
somewhat within the reach of science, but I think now I think it's in the hands
of the computer scientists and the neuroscientists.
Not a physicist. Perhaps at some point, but I think
physicists will try to simplify it down to something that they can use their
methods and maybe they're not appropriate. Maybe we simply need
to do more machine learning on bigger scales,
evolve machines. Machines not only that learn but evolve their own
architecture. As a process of learning, evolve an
architecture not under our control, only partially under our control, but under
the control of machine learning. I'll tell you another thing that I find
awesome. You know this Google Bing that they
taught computers how to play chess? Yeah, yeah. Okay.
They taught computers how to play chess, not by teaching them how to play chess,
but just having them play against each other. Against each other.
Self play. Against each other. This is a form of evolution.
These machines evolved. They evolved in intelligence.
They evolved in intelligence without anybody telling them how to do it.
They were not engineered. They just played against each other and got better
and better and better. That makes me think that
machines can evolve intelligence. What exact kind of intelligence? I
don't know. But in understanding that better and
better, maybe we'll get better clues as to what
goes on in our own intelligence. Well, life in intelligence is
last question. What kind of questions can science
not currently answer and may never be able to answer?
Yeah.
Is there intelligence out there that's underlies the whole thing?
You can call in with a G word if you want. I can say
are we a computer simulation with a purpose?
Is there an agent, an intelligent agent that underlies
or is responsible for the whole thing? Does that intelligent agent
satisfy the laws of physics? Does it satisfy the laws of quantum mechanics?
Is it made of atoms and molecules? Yeah, there's a lot of questions.
And I don't see... It seems to me a real question.
It's an answerable question. Well, I don't know if it's answerable.
The questions have to be answerable to be real.
Some philosophers would say that a question is not a question
unless it's answerable. This question doesn't seem to me
answerable by any known method, but it seems to me real.
There's no better place to end. Leonard, thank you so much for talking today.
Okay, good.